Docs for ExtendedTask feature (#70)
posit-dev/py-shiny-site: docs/reactive-nonblocking.qmd

---
title: Non-blocking operations
---

Sometimes in a Shiny app, you need to perform a long-running operation, like loading a large dataset or doing an expensive computation.
If you do this in a reactive context, it will block the rest of the application from running until the operation completes.
This can be frustrating for users, who may think that the app has crashed.

Worse, if you have multiple users, then one user's long-running operation will block the other users' apps from running as well.
These other users will not even be aware that their slow performance is due to another user's actions.

> In this article, we'll look at how to make your Shiny apps more responsive by using non-blocking operations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this article, we'll learn how to Shiny apps more responsive by using non-blocking operations.
```

> We'll also go out of our way to explain why the usual Python async techniques don't work the way you expect in Shiny.

Reviewer: I'm not sure this is necessary. If you feel like it is, perhaps there's a less negative take on it?

Author: What started this whole thing was Shiny for Python users asking why using the async keyword didn't seem to make things concurrent. I do think it's quite surprising that we're a web framework that has async, yet it doesn't do the thing you expect async to do.

I'll tweak the wording

## Using async/await in Shiny

> Asynchronous programming is a technique used in Python to increase scalability and responsiveness, usually in networked apps.

Reviewer: I don't think many readers will know what you mean by networksed

Python supports async programming at the language level, using the `async`/`await` keywords; in the standard library, with the [`asyncio`](https://docs.python.org/3/library/asyncio.html) module; and in third-party libraries, like [FastAPI](https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/) and [aiohttp](https://docs.aiohttp.org/).

Shiny has async support as well, but it's a bit different from your typical async Python framework.

> On the one hand, Shiny is built on top of [Starlette](https://www.starlette.io/), which is an async web framework, so it's possible to use async functions in many parts of your Shiny app. On the other hand, Shiny is also designed around reactive programming concepts, and that creates constraints on how async functions can be used.

Reviewer: One sentence per line, please

Author: I'd give anything for an auto-formatter

### Reactive async/await

Shiny supports the use of `async` and `await` in your reactive code.
You can use `async` functions in `@reactive.effect`, `@reactive.calc`, and render functions, and within those async functions you can use `await` to wait for the results of other async functions.

```{shinylive-python}
#| standalone: true
#| components: [editor, viewer]
import asyncio
import datetime

> from random import random
> import time

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

from shiny import App, reactive, render, ui

app_ui = ui.page_fluid(
    ui.p("The time is ", ui.output_text("current_time", inline=True)),
    ui.hr(),
    ui.input_numeric("x", "x", value=1),
    ui.input_numeric("y", "y", value=2),
    ui.input_task_button("btn", "Add numbers"),
    ui.output_text("sum"),
)

def server(input, output, session):
    @render.text
    def current_time():
        reactive.invalidate_later(1)
        return datetime.datetime.now().strftime("%H:%M:%S %p")

    @reactive.calc
    @reactive.event(input.btn)
    async def sum_values():
        await asyncio.sleep(5)
        return input.x() + input.y()

    @render.text
    async def sum():
        return str(await sum_values())

> app = App(app_ui, server)

Reviewer: What's your reasoning for just including Core apps? Would you prefer to have a Express / Core tab option?

Author: This was intended to go live before Express, it's supposed to merge into main not rc-express. Although the window keeps shrinking...

Reviewer: We'll need to come back to this before merging rc-express (if we don't, it'll feel awkward that everything else in reactivity and before is Express first, but this is Core first) 

So, ideally, I'd prefer to do those changes now and merge into rc-express. AFAICT, there is nothing in the critical path of the content there (other than the API reference, which doesn't seem absolutely critical, and should get done this week).

```

However, you may be surprised to learn that this technique alone does not result in improved responsiveness in Shiny apps!

In the app above, the first thing in the UI is a reactive output that displays the current time.
Click the button and notice that, during the five seconds that the app is waiting for the (artificially slow) sum calculation to complete, the time does not update.
Despite being defined as an asynchronous function, the sum logic is still blocking the time output.

> You could replace `await asyncio.sleep(5)` with its synchronous equivalent, `time.sleep(5)`, and you'd get exactly the same result.

Reviewer: I think this would read better if this came before the example

> ### When async is not async

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Why does async still block?
```

While surprising, this behavior is intentional.

> Shiny goes out of its way to ensure that reactive calcs, effects, and renderers are run in a serial fashion, never concurrently.

Reviewer: If you have a succinct way of explaining why that it is, it seems worth explaining.

```suggestion
Shiny goes out of its way to ensure that reactive functions are run in a serial fashion, never concurrently.
```

This means that if you have two (async) reactive effects that both call `await asyncio.sleep(1)`, the second one will not even begin to start executing until the first one has finished.

> This is true even if the two reactive effects belong to two different Shiny sessions (within one Python process).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is true even if the two reactive effects belong to two different Shiny sessions and one Python process is serving those sessions.
```

But Shiny reactive code is all about shared state and interconnected tasks.

So in summary, use async functions in your reactive code if you need to call async-only functions.
Don't expect your application to run faster, more responsively, or more efficiently.

## True non-blocking behavior with `ExtendedTask`

To achieve true non-blocking behavior in Shiny applications, and retain the ability to reason about how our apps will behave, we use the following strategy:

1. Read whatever reactive inputs and calcs will be needed to perform the task.
2. Perform the task asynchronously and concurrently, outside of the reactive graph.
3. When the task completes, bring the resulting value (or error, if the operation failed) back into the reactive graph.

We've created a high-level class called `ExtendedTask` to make all of this pretty easy.
To create an `ExtendedTask`, use the `@reactive.extended_task` decorator on an async function.
Let's adapt the example above to use an `ExtendedTask`:

```{shinylive-python}
#| standalone: true
#| components: [editor, viewer]
import asyncio
import datetime

> from random import random
> import time

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

    @render.text
    def current_time():
        reactive.invalidate_later(1)
        return datetime.datetime.now().strftime("%H:%M:%S %p")

    @ui.bind_task_button(button_id="btn")
    @reactive.extended_task
    async def sum_values(x, y):
        await asyncio.sleep(5)
        return x + y

    @reactive.effect
    @reactive.event(input.btn)
    def btn_click():
        sum_values(input.x(), input.y())

    @render.text
    def sum():
        return str(sum_values.result())

app = App(app_ui, server)
```

Note the `sum_values` function, which is where the actual (slow) work is done.
It is decorated with `@reactive.extended_task`, which means that it will be run asynchronously and concurrently with other tasks, and that its result will be available as `sum_values.result()`.

We've also added a `@ui.bind_task_button` decorator on top of the `@reactive.extended_task` decorator.
This synchronizes the `ExtendedTask` object with the `ui.input_task_button` in the UI, so that the button will be in its "Processing..." state while the task is running.
It _does not_ cause button clicks to invoke the task; we still need to do that manually, which we'll talk about next.

> If you use some other UI gesture or condition besides `ui.input_task_button` to invoke the task, don't include the `@ui.bind_task_button` decorator--it doesn't work with `ui.input_action_button`, for example.

Reviewer: This feels like a `::: callout-note`?

> ### Invoking an extended task

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Invoking the task
```

Unlike a reactive effect, simply creating an extended task does not cause it to run.
It needs to be invoked (called like a function).

In this case, the `sum_values` extended task is called from the `btn_click` reactive effect (`@reactive.effect`), which runs whenever the button is clicked (`@reactive.event(input.btn)`).

> Notice also that the `sum_values` logic no longer reads `input.x()` and `input.y()` directly; as an extended task, it is not allowed to read reactive inputs or calcs (and attempting to do so would result in an error).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notice also that the `sum_values` logic no longer reads `input.x()` and `input.y()` directly in the function body (doing so would lead to an error). 
Instead, when invoking the task, we pass reactive values to it.
```

Instead, it takes `x` and `y` as arguments, which are passed in by `btn_click`.

> ### Using the result of an extended task

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Retrieving results
```

The `sum` output is now a regular reactive calc, which reads `sum_values.result()` to get the result of the extended task.
This output actually does not "wait for" the extended task to complete, exactly; instead, it will run multiple times, as the extended task goes through different states.
For each state, `sum_values.result()` will behave differently:

> * **Not yet clicked:** Raises a silent exception, which will cause the `sum` output to display nothing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Not yet invoked:** Raises a silent exception, which will cause the `sum` output to display nothing.
```

* **Running:** Raises a special type of exception that tells Shiny to keep the output in the "in progress" state.
* **Successfully completed:** Returns the return value of `sum_values`, in this case an integer.

> * **Completed with an exception:** If `sum_values` raised an exception while processing, then re-raise that same exception, causing it to be displayed to the user in the `sum` output.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Completed with an exception:** If `sum_values` raised an exception while processing, then that same exception is re-raised, causing it to be displayed to the user in the `sum` output.
```

Author: I'd like to keep the tense the same as the other bullets--I'll change "re-raise" in my original to "re-raises". Is that better?

Reviewer: Yep, thanks

Just remember that `sum_values.result()` is a reactive, synchronous method that knows how to do right thing based on the state of the extended task.

### Other features of extended tasks

#### Cancel a running task

Although it's not shown in the example above, you can also cancel an extended task by calling the `cancel()` method (for example, `sum_values.cancel()`).
This will attempt to cancel the asyncio task that is running the extended task, and will cause `sum_values.result()` to raise a silent exception.

Calling `sum_values.cancel()` on a task that isn't running will have no effect.

#### Multiple invocations

An extended task can run concurrently to reactive code and to other extended tasks--that's its whole purpose.
However, a single extended task object cannot run itself multiple times concurrently. If you call `sum_values()` while it is already running, it will enqueue the new invocation and run it after the first one completes.

This is often not the behavior you want, especially if the task takes a long time to complete.
A user may accidentally click an action button twice, or they may click it again because they think the first click didn't work.

> To prevent this, use replace `ui.input_action_button` with `ui.input_task_button`, which will automatically prevent subsequent clicks until the task completes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To prevent this, use `ui.input_task_button` instead of `ui.input_action_button` to invoke the task since the former automatically prevents subsequent clicks until the task completes.
```

This is fine for logic that is truly asynchronous, like making a network request via an asyncio-aware library like [aiohttp](https://docs.aiohttp.org/en/stable/), but it's not ideal for CPU-bound tasks or when performing I/O synchronously.
Because CPU-bound or synchronous tasks will block the main thread, we're back to where we started: the rest of the application cannot proceed until the task completes.

Fortunately, we can rely on Python's built-in support for running asyncio tasks on different threads or processes.

::: {.callout-note}
The examples below work well in Shiny Core, but a naive port to Shiny Express will not work as well.
The `ThreadPoolExecutor` and `ProcessPoolExecutor` objects need to be created as module-level variables, not as session-level variables, since we'd ideally like to pool resources across all sessions.
:::

::: {.callout-note}
`ProcessPoolExecutor` is not available in Shinylive (e.g. WASM mode).
`ThreadPoolExecutor` is available in Shinylive and appears to work, but doesn't: it actually performs all of its work on the main thread.

> :::

Author: The shared module concept helps, but not enough--the pools cannot be cleaned up when the app shuts down, both because 1) there's no `app` object to call `app.on_shutdown` on, and 2) the shared module concept wouldn't give you access to the app object even if there was one.

We can definitely devise a way to do this in the future though.

    ui.output_text("sum"),
)

pool = concurrent.futures.ThreadPoolExecutor()

def slow_sum(x, y):
    time.sleep(5)  # Simulate a slow synchronous task
    return x + y

def server(input, output, session):
    @ui.bind_task_button(button_id="btn")
    @reactive.extended_task
    async def sum_values(x, y):
        loop = asyncio.get_event_loop()
        return await loop.run_in_executor(pool, slow_sum, x, y)

    @reactive.effect
    @reactive.event(input.btn)
    def btn_click():
        sum_values(input.x(), input.y())

    @render.text
    def sum():
        return str(sum_values.result())

app = App(app_ui, server)
app.on_shutdown(pool.shutdown)
```

With a small tweak, we can run the task on a different process instead of a different thread.
This is a good strategy for CPU-bound code, because it allows the task to run concurrently with other Python code.

```{python}
#| eval: false
import asyncio
import concurrent.futures
import time

from shiny import App, reactive, render, ui

app_ui = ui.page_fluid(
    ui.input_numeric("x", "x", value=1),
    ui.input_numeric("y", "y", value=2),
    ui.input_task_button("btn", "Add numbers"),
    ui.output_text("sum"),
)

> pool = concurrent.futures.ProcessPoolExecutor()

Reviewer: Feels like it's be better UX to just callout this change rather than listing the entire example again? Or put both examples into a tabset?

Author: Good call, especially since they don't actually run in the page.

    @reactive.extended_task
    async def sum_values(x, y):
        loop = asyncio.get_event_loop()
        return await loop.run_in_executor(pool, slow_sum, x, y)

    @reactive.effect
    @reactive.event(input.btn)
    def btn_click():
        sum_values(input.x(), input.y())

    @render.text
    def sum():
        return str(sum_values.result())

app = App(app_ui, server)
app.on_shutdown(pool.shutdown)
```

In both of these examples, the `slow_sum` function is defined at the module level, outside of the Shiny server function.
This is critically important for `ProcessPoolExecutor` to work correctly because of how Python's `multiprocessing` module works: only module-level functions can survive the trip to a worker Python subprocess.

There's also the `app.on_shutdown(pool.shutdown)` line at the end of each example.
This is necessary to ensure that the pool is shut down when the app stops running.
In particular, if you're using `ProcessPoolExecutor` and neglect to shut down the pool, you can end up with orphaned Python processes hanging around.

## Summary

Only use async functions in your reactive code if you need to call async-only functions.

> Don't expect your application to run faster, more responsively, or more efficiently.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Don't expect your application to run faster, more responsively, or more efficiently with async functions alone.
```

Author: I like the stronger wording. It's true that async code will perform the same as sync, and we've made it clear there is a different path you need to take if you want concurrency. I think the stronger wording is important because it's such a violation of expectations.

Reviewer: 👌
